---
author: "Lucas LaValva"
date: "March 3, 2022"
title: "Advancing mathematics by guiding human intuition with AI"
---

I went into this article expecting to learn about a crazy development that had been made in the field of AI or Machine Learning that allows it to apply some level of intuition that is similar to that of a classical human mathematician. When it was made clear that this was _not_ the article's purpuse, I was hoping for at the very least an introduction to a family of tools which enable mathematicians to create visualizations or representations which enhance understanding, or which enable a faster and more representative way for mathematicians to teach others about their work. With all of these expectations, I was sorely dissapointed. The only use of AI in this article was to generate sets of solutions or functional dependencies for problems that were already well-defined by mathematicians. While this is an excellent use for certain statistical models that are used in AI and I am sure that there is a benefit to using it this way in mathematics, I believe that it is a stretch to claim that this is a method of "guiding human intuition". It seems as though the AI in this article simply enables mathematicians to explore a problem in certain ways that are more efficient than writing hundreds (or thousands) of examples by hand. If this is the case, then I don't think leveraging AI in this way should be considered any more revolutionary than writing a Python script that uses brute force to produce a set of solutions for a problem. While it is an incredibly useful tool, my personal opinion is that this kind of AI and Machine Learning is put on too high of a pedestal.

A wonderful example of a place where I believe that algorithms and computing are being used to _really_ guide human intuition in mathematics is a tool that the research team at Microsoft has been developing called **[Lean](https://leanprover.github.io/)**. This is essentially a programming language that has been written for mathematicians, similar to Mathematica or Wolfram Language, or maybe Prolog. What makes Lean stand out is that after the programmer has defined their problem, the language points out any inconsistencies and helps the mathematician to solve them. Alex Kontorovich explains Lean in a very engaging manner during **[this interview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C-i4q-Xlnis&t=3213s)** (timestamp included in link) that he had with Grand Sanderson. After hearing what he has to say, it is hard to make a claim that computing _won't_ become an integral part of higher level mathematics in the coming years.