---
author: "Lucas LaValva"
date: "February 18, 2022"
title: "Math Education, New and Old"
---

I read Jo Boaler's _What's Math Got to Do With it_ about a year ago after Lockhart's Lament opened my eyes to the atrocities of math education, and I agreed with much of what it had to say. One of the largest lessons that Dr. Boaler learned from her research was that if some level of interactivity was involved with math education, it was much easier to teach kids about math. This could be acheived by giving kids hard problems that they had to figure out by themselves, or by organizing math activities for math students. One of her favorite activities sharpened her students' mental math skills by getting them to develop their own tricks for multiplying large numbers together in their heads, before sharing them with the class. Her book portrayed a distain for rote memorization, and instead encouraged activities that inspired understanding of underlying ideas. This message seems to have carried over in her work with Dr. Levitt, where times tables are replaced with lessons on calculator use. While I think that calculators and computers can help us to accelerate math education, I do not think that this is the way to do it. There's a fine line between using a calculator to speed up a complicated mathematical analysis and removing the fundamentals of arithmetic from children's lives by allowing them to do all of their calculations with a computer.

Two pieces of media that I have read in the past detail wonderful ways to include computers in math education. **[Kill Math](http://worrydream.com/KillMath/)**, a years-long project by Apple employee Bret Victor, is all about how algebra can be thought of as a _user interface_ that is used as a tool for finding solutions to problems. Because algebra is simply an interface with which numbers can be manipulated, then it stands to reason that there are _other interfaces_ which may do the same thing in a cleaner way. Since we have computers at our disposal, there is no reason why we can't make the math interface of the twenty-first century one that is interactive and plyable. This is demonstrated well in his talk **[Interactive Exploration of a Dynamical System](http://vimeo.com/23839605/)** and his description of the (now deprecated) **[Scrubbing Calculator](http://worrydream.com/ScrubbingCalculator/)**.

Sal Khan, the engineer who stumbled upon math education by tutoring his neice and a few of her friends remotely with a small app he wrote called "Khan Academy," also wrote a book about the subject of reform after his website became a smashing success. In this book, _The One World Schoolhouse_, he makes many points that are similar to those of Dr. Boaler and Mr. Wolfram; math education is not ideal for a majority of students. Those who catch on to new topics quickly are always bored with class material, and those who learn more slowly are prevented from learning because the teacher moves onto the next topic before they have a good idea of the current one. His (albeit fairly unrealistic) solution is to reform not only math education, but _all_ of elementary education. In his dream school, children pace themselves while they independently move through the network of human knowledge, both digitally and with the help of teachers. When they are bored of this or they need a break, they spend time playing engaging and mentally stimulating games that incorporate math with all other disciplines. While we are surely far away from this dream, I hope that we can have schools that incorporate a few of his brilliant ideas without the unnecessary bureaucracy that comes with standardized testing and a rigid common core curriculum.