---
author: "Lucas LaValva"
date: "January 28, 2022"
title: "Tokeida Response"
---

Tokeida's youthful, learning-based outlook on the world is incredibly inspiring. From my interpretation, it seems as though all of his interesting life pursuits were possible because of a single decision that he made early in his life$-$ to cherish the fleeting moments of childlike wonderment that happen to occur amidst the rat race of everyday life and use them as a baseline for further research. This mentality inspired Tokeida to study calculus after reading an interesting book on the train, and to pursue a Ph.D. in Mathematics. Later in his life, he has learned to identify ever more granular instances of this childlike wonderment, and bring them to life by exploring their properties in everyday objects. The curiosity and creativity that he is using to do this is undoubtedly encouraging a healthy and youthful mind.

I believe that Tokeida's intent while he explored the properties of linked mobius strips with Numberphile was not simply to show his audience about the interesting results that he had found. While this may have been Brady's decision at Numberphile and not Tokeida's, part II of the mobius strip video ended with loose ends; after the viewers were given a tool for reasoning about linked paper loops, they were left to explore the linked hearts on their own. It seems as though his hope is that this cliffhanger will inspire his audience to build linked hearts of their own, in order to understand their properties. Using strips of paper and tape, I constructed myself a few sets of linked hearts and was pleasantly surprised by the results.