---
author: "Lucas LaValva"
date: "February 11, 2022"
title: "Funding for Fermat's Last Theorem"
---

Pure mathematics is often treated as a space that is pure, precise, and apart from anything that exists in the _real_ world. Because of its apparent purity, it is easy to forget that the people who generate and prove difficult theorems are still humans who have to put food on the table. This is why it is so jarring that these articles, especially "The Texas Oil Heir Who Took On Math's Impossible Dare", focus not on the math itself but instead on the funding that was required to solve an interesting math problem. Logic and mathematics is free to timelessly exist in the theoretical ether for as long as we let it, but at the end of the day much of its beauty cannot be discovered until bright minds are given some form of permission to explore it. At first I was skeptical of William Broad's enthusiasm about giving similar credit to Andrew Wiles, the man who solved Fermat's Last Theorem, and James Vaughn Jr., the man who threw a small portion of his oil riches to a cause that he found interesting. However, after further evaluation I have changed my perspective: people who fund research in Mathematics should be celebrated for many reasons. First, and most importantly, if enough rich people read about other rich people who had theorems named after them just because they gave money to a mathematician, there is a much higher likelihood that pure math will have more funding in the future. Celebration of those who fund math is also important from the mathematicians' point of view because, at least stereotypically, most high-performing academics have their heads too far in the clouds to seek funding. My hope is that this type of news reaches more people like James Vaughn, so they can breed the next generation of Andrew Wileses.

The story of Sir Andrew Wiles and his discovery of the proof for Fermat's Last Theorem is supremely inspiring. I learned more about it from **[this video by Numberphile](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qiNcEguuFSA)**, which does not at all mention the financial assistance that Wiles received from James Vaughn. This makes sense, as the story is framed as one of decades-long obsessive and tireless pursuit after a problem that seemed impossible until it was solved. This is a much more poetic and beautiful way to tell the story, and I understand why it may be imporant to separate the story of Wiles from that of Vaughn. However, both angles have a benefit towards mathematics and I feel as though it is important for both men to be publicly celebrated.